The Last Leaf
By O. Henry

In a little district west of Washington Square the streets have run crazy and broken themselves into small strips called "places." One of these places was called Greenwich Village, and here Sue and Johnsy had their studio.

Johnsy was from California and Sue from Maine. They had met in a restaurant and discovered they both wanted to be artists. They rented the top floor of a three-story brick house.

In November, a cold stranger came to visit the city. This disease, pneumonia, stalked about the district, touching one here and there with his icy fingers. Poor little Johnsy was among his victims.

She lay on her bed, looking through the small window at the blank side of the brick house twenty feet away. A vine climbed halfway up the brick wall. Its branches clung to the decaying bricks.

"Twelve," said Johnsy; and a little later "eleven"; and then "ten" and "nine"; and then "eight" and "seven" almost together.

Sue looked out the window. An old ivy vine climbed halfway up the brick wall opposite. The cold breath of autumn had blown away its leaves until its skeleton branches clung to the wall.

"Six," said Johnsy, in almost a whisper. "They're falling faster now. Three days ago there were almost a hundred. There goes another one. There are only five left now."

"Five what, dear?"

"Leaves. On the ivy vine. When the last one falls I must go, too."

"Oh, I never heard of such nonsense," Sue said. "What have old ivy leaves to do with your getting well?"

But Johnsy did not answer. The lonesomest thing in all the world is a soul when it is making ready to go on its mysterious journey.

The day wore away, and even through the twilight they could see the lone ivy leaf clinging to its stem against the wall. And then, with the coming of the night the north wind was again loosed.

When it was light enough Johnsy commanded that the shade be raised. The ivy leaf was still there.

"I've been a bad girl, Sue," said Johnsy. "Something has made that last leaf stay there to show me how wicked I was. It is a sin to want to die."

That afternoon the doctor came, and Sue followed him into the hallway.

"Even chances," said the doctor. "With good nursing you'll win. And now I must see another case I have downstairs. Behrman, his name is - some kind of an artist, I believe. Pneumonia, too. He is an old, weak man, and the attack is acute. There is no hope for him."

The next day the doctor said to Sue: "She's out of danger. You've won. The right food and care now - that's all."

That afternoon Sue came to the bed where Johnsy lay and put one arm around her.

"I have something to tell you, white mouse," she said. "Mr. Behrman died of pneumonia today in the hospital. He was ill only two days. They found him on the morning of the first day in his room downstairs helpless with pain. His shoes and clothing were wet through and icy cold. They couldn't imagine where he had been on such a dreadful night.

"And then they found a lantern, still lighted, and a ladder that had been dragged from its place, and some scattered brushes, and a palette with green and yellow colors mixed on it, and - look out the window, dear, at the last ivy leaf on the wall. Didn't you wonder why it never fluttered or moved when the wind blew? Ah, darling, it's Behrman's masterpiece - he painted it there the night that the last leaf fell."