The Ransom of Red Chief
by O. Henry

It looked like a good proposition to Bill and me. We needed exactly two thousand dollars to pull off a land deal in Illinois, and we figured that kidnapping a child from a small town would be the easiest way to get it.

We selected for our victim the only child of a prominent citizen named Ebenezer Dorset in the town of Summit, Alabama. The father was a respectable and tight-fisted mortgage banker, and we figured he would pay a handsome ransom to get his boy back.

The kid was about ten years old, with freckles and red hair. Bill and I grabbed him while he was throwing rocks at a kitten. We took him to a cave on the mountain about three miles from Summit and made our camp there.

"Now," I said to the kid, "you're captured. And if you don't behave, we'll have to be rough with you."

The boy looked at us with bright, excited eyes. "Gee!" he said. "This is better than going to school! I never had such fun in my life."

He immediately renamed himself Red Chief and declared that Bill was Old Hank the Trapper and I was Snake-eye the Spy. He announced that at daybreak, he would scalp Bill and burn me at the stake. He was clearly having the time of his life.

Bill tried to be friendly. "What's your name, boy?"

"Johnny," he said. "But in my new profession, I'm Red Chief, the terror of the plains!"

That night, I drew up a ransom letter demanding fifteen hundred dollars for the boy's return. But our captive was making Bill's life miserable. Johnny had hidden Bill's boots, put a snake in his blanket, and kept him awake all night with war whoops and demands for stories.

By morning, Bill was exhausted and irritable. "I'm beginning to think we made a mistake," he whispered to me.

Johnny overheard him. "Mistake? Are you crazy? This is the most fun I've ever had! Let's play Indian some more!"

I sent the ransom note to old Dorset, signed "Two Desperate Men," and waited for a reply. Meanwhile, Johnny continued his reign of terror. He made Bill play horse for hours, used him as a mountain for a game he called "King of the Mountain," and insisted on cooking elaborate meals that were mostly inedible.

The reply came back from old Dorset faster than we expected, but it wasn't what we wanted to hear:

"Two Desperate Men: I received your note demanding $1,500 for my son's return. I think you're a little high in your demands. I hereby make you a counter-proposition: You bring Johnny home and pay me $250, and I'll agree to take him off your hands. I believe you'll find this generous under the circumstances."

Bill was delighted. "Let's pay it!" he said. "I'd rather face a tribe of wild Indians than spend another day with that red-headed wildcat!"

But Johnny had other ideas. When we told him we were taking him home, he threw a fit.

"I don't want to go home!" he wailed. "I want to stay here and play with Old Hank! Home is boring! Here I can be Red Chief!"

He grabbed Bill around the legs and held on tight. Bill pried him loose, but Johnny immediately climbed onto Bill's back and began beating him with his fists.

"This settles it," Bill announced. "I'm paying that $250 myself if I have to steal it!"

We dragged Johnny back to town. As we approached his house, the boy made one last desperate attempt to escape back to our camp. Bill had to tackle him on the front lawn.

Old Dorset came out to meet us with a smile. "Right on time," he said, collecting the $250 from Bill's trembling hands.

"Daddy!" Johnny cried. "These men are taking me away! Don't let them!"

"Don't worry, son," his father said calmly. "They're not taking you anywhere. You're staying right here."

Bill and I made our escape as quickly as possible. As we drove out of town, we could hear Johnny's wails of disappointment echoing behind us.

"Never again," Bill muttered, rubbing his scratched face. "Next time, let's just rob a bank."

Sometimes the hunter becomes the hunted, and sometimes a simple kidnapping becomes the most expensive mistake of your life. We never did get our two thousand dollars, but we learned something valuable: there are some children who are more trouble than they're worth—especially when they're having too much fun to want to be rescued.